Title: NALSA FAQs
Publisher: National Legal Services Authority
Jurisdiction: India
URL: https://nalsa.gov.in/faqs/
Domain: Legal Aid
Downloaded on: 2026-06-24

7. What are legal services? What is included in free legal aid provided by the Legal Services Institutions? What is the nature of free legal services?
According to Section 2(c) of the Act, “legal services” includes any service in the conduct of any case or other legal proceeding before any court or other authority or tribunal and the giving of advice on any legal matter. It includes free legal services in civil and criminal matters for those poor and marginalized people who cannot afford the services of a lawyer for the conduct of a case or a legal proceeding in any Court, Tribunal or Authority. Provision of free legal aid may include:
Representation by an Advocate in legal proceedings;
Payment of process fees, expenses of witnesses and all other charges (charges such as court fees, stamp duty etc.) payable or incurred in connection with any legal proceedings in appropriate cases (provided that Court Fees will be payable only after an application moved before the concerned Court for suing as an indigent has been disposed of and orders of the Court obtained thereon);
Preparation of pleadings, memo of appeal, paper book including printing and translation of documents in legal proceedings;
Drafting of legal documents, special leave petition etc.;
Supply of certified copies of judgments, orders, notes of evidence and other documents in legal proceedings.
Free Legal Services also include provision of aid and advice to the beneficiaries to access the benefits under the welfare statutes and schemes framed by the Central Government or the State Government and to ensure access to justice in any other manner.
8. How is free legal aid different from legal advice and assistance?
Legal aid is the provision of legal representation to a person in the District Courts, High Courts and Supreme Court or tribunals, by a lawyer assigned by the Legal Service Authority concerned.
Legal Advice and Assistance is the provision of advice on general areas of law as governed by the laws of India by the lawyers employed with the Legal Services Institution concerned. For e.g. if a person has to file a case in court, he would be provided legal aid (in form of assignment of a Legal Services Advocate). However, if he only needs some help in drafting a legal notice to be sent prior to filing of a complaint under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881, he would get legal consultation/ advice regarding the same. A person who does not come under the purview of Section 12 of Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, to be eligible for free legal aid, can still avail legal advice and assistance from the Legal Services Institutions.
9. Whether one needs to pay for legal services provided by Legal Services Institutions constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987?
No. Legal services provided by the Legal Services Institutions are completely free of cost to the beneficiary. All costs involved are borne by the Legal Services Institutions.
10. Does one have to pay any charge/fee for acquiring or submitting an application form for free legal aid?
No, there is absolutely no charge for getting or submitting an application form for free legal aid.
11. Are there any Helpline Services provided by NALSA for urgent legal assistance?
Yes. One can directly contact on NALSA Helpline Toll-Free Number 15100 to seek urgent legal assistance.
12. How can one approach NALSA/ SLSA/ DLSA/ TLSC/ HCLSC/ SCLSC? Where can an application for legal aid be made?
One may approach the NALSA/SLSA/DLSA/TLSC/HCLSC/SCLSC personally; or by post; or through NALSA’s Legal Services Management System (LSMS) portal; or through e-mail. Depending upon the territorial and subject matter jurisdiction of the case, an individual should approach the following appropriate authority:
Taluka Legal Services Committee which is in the premises of the Court in that Taluka; or
District Legal Services Authority which is in the premises of the District Court in the District Headquarters; or
The concerned State Legal Services Authority (as the State Legal Services Authorities maintain a central panel for some categories of cases such as for the Tribunals etc.);
The High Court Legal Services Committee which is in the premises of the concerned High Court; or
The Supreme Court Legal Services Committee for cases before the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
Each District Legal Services Authority, High Court Legal Services Committee and State Legal Services Authority has a Front Office where an application for legal aid can be filed.
One can even access and apply on the online portal of NALSA (https://nalsa.gov.in/) or the website of the State Legal Services Authorities.
One can also fill up the ready-made form/application form that is available at the nearest Legal Services Institution and submit the same at either the Legal Services Institution physically, or post the application to the Legal Services Institution.
One can even make an application in writing on a simple piece of paper with the necessary details such as: name, gender, residential address, employment status, nationality, whether SC/ST (with proof in support), income per annum (with affidavit), the case for which legal aid is required etc. and submit it physically or send by post
Another option is to send the application online i.e. by email to NALSA (at nalsa-dla@nic.in). It is also possible to make an application orally – a Paralegal Volunteer or an officer of the concerned Legal Services Institution will assist the person in such cases.
13. Can one choose a lawyer of his choice while availing free legal aid?
It is possible to avail the services of a lawyer of one’s choice from the Panel of lawyers empanelled with the Legal Services Institution concerned. According to Regulation 7(6) of the National Legal Services Authority (Free and Competent Legal Services) Regulations 2010, the application for legal services will be scrutinized by the Member-Secretary or the Secretary and if the applicant has mentioned/expressed his/her choice of a lawyer on the panel, such Member-Secretary or Secretary can consider and allow the same. However, it is not mandatory to permit the same.
14. Can one get free legal consultation only, even if one does not want to pursue a proper case in the courts?
Yes, it is possible to get legal consultation only (which is covered under “legal advice and assistance”).
15. How can one give feedback on the services provided by the Legal Services Institutions under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987?
One can submit the feedback on the LSMS portal; by email or post or by visiting the office of the concerned Legal Services Authority.
LEGAL AID BENEFICIARIES
16. Who is eligible to seek legal aid from the Legal Services Institutions under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987? What kind of cases can one apply free legal aid for?
As per Section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, every person who has to file or defend a case shall be entitled to legal services under the Act if that person is–
A member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe (on producing a certificate in this regard);
A victim of trafficking in human beings or begar as referred to in Article 23 of the Constitution of India 1950;
A woman or a child;
A person with disability as defined in legislations dealing with rights of persons with disabilities;
A person under circumstances of underserved want such as being a victim of a mass disaster, ethnic, violence, caste atrocity, flood, drought, earthquake or industrial disaster;
An industrial workman;
A person in custody, including custody in a protective home within the meaning of clause (g) of Section 2 of the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 (104 of 1956), or in an observation home, special home, place of safety, children’s home under the juvenile justice laws, or in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home under the Mental Healthcare legislations; or
Person in receipt of annual income less than Rs. 03 lakh or such other higher amount as may be prescribed by the State Government, if the case is before a court other than the Supreme Court, and less than rupees twelve thousand or such other higher amount as may be prescribed by the Central Government if the case is before the Supreme Court.
In addition to these categories, any person falling within criteria specially created by the State- specific Legal Aid Regulations may also get free legal aid. (SEE QUESTION NO. 30.)
NALSA also has come up with specific schemes for providing free legal services to its targeted beneficiaries. The schemes are available at https://nalsa.gov.in/acts-rules/preventive-strategic-legal-services-schemes
According to Section 13 (1) of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, any individual who satisfies any criteria under Section 12 is entitled to receive legal services, provided that the concerned Legal Services Institution is satisfied that such person has a genuine case to prosecute or defend the matter. There is hence, no bar as to which kind of cases one can apply and not apply for. All kinds of cases are included as long as the individual satisfies the eligibility under Section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.
17. Whether a financially independent woman is eligible for free legal aid?
Yes, a woman is entitled for free legal aid irrespective of her income or financial status. A woman is eligible to apply for free legal aid by virtue of Section 12(c) of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.
18. Till what age is a child eligible for free legal aid?
A child is eligible for free legal aid till the age of majority i.e. 18 years. This is provided in Section 12 (c) of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987. So, any child can apply for free legal aid till he turns 18 years old. Even on attaining the age of majority, the child can continue to get free legal aid, if she/ he falls within the other criteria enlisted in Section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.
19. How can a child apply for grant of free legal aid?
A child can apply for legal aid through his parents/ legal guardian.
20. Can a child being prosecuted for a criminal offence be provided free legal aid?
A child alleged to be in conflict with law is entitled to free legal aid.
21. Are Senior Citizens eligible for free legal aid?
Senior citizens’ eligibility for free legal aid depends on the rules framed by the respective State Governments in this regard. In Delhi for example, senior citizens are eligible for free legal aid subject to prescribed ceiling of annual income for senior citizens i.e. Rs. 4 lacs per annum. One may look into the specific State regulations on legal services to check eligibility.
22. Is a person with mental illness eligible for grant of free legal aid?
Yes. Section 12 (d) of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, provides for the same.
23. Is a person under circumstances of undeserved want (such as being a victim of a mass disaster, ethnic, violence, caste atrocity, flood, drought, earthquake, or industrial disaster) eligible for free legal aid?
Yes. Section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, provides for the same.
24. Is an Industrial Workman eligible for free legal aid?
Yes. Section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 provides for the same.
25. Is a person who is in custody, including custody in a protective home or in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home eligible for free legal aid?
26. Whether a person from Other Backward Class (OBC) is entitled to free legal aid like a person of the SC/ ST community?
No. He may only be entitled if he falls within the other categories mentioned in Section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.
27. Can persons called for questioning at the Police Station or persons arrested by the Police avail free legal aid?
Yes, as per NALSA’s Early Access to Justice at Pre-Arrest, Arrest and Remand framework, persons called for questioning i.e. suspects and persons arrested by the police can also avail free legal aid.
28. Can persons avail of legal aid services at the time of production and remand hearings in magistrate courts?
Yes, persons can avail of free legal aid services at the time of production and remand hearing in Magistrate Courts including the courts of Executive Magistrates.
29. Does NALSA have any specific schemes for different categories of legal aid beneficiaries?
Yes. NALSA has several Preventive & Strategic Legal Services Schemes, the compendium of which is available at https://nalsa.gov.in/acts-rules/preventive-strategic-legal-services-schemes . The list of schemes is as under:
NALSA (Legal Services to Disaster Victims through Legal Services Authorities) Scheme, 2010;
NALSA (Victims of Trafficking and Commercial Sexual Exploitation) Scheme, 2015;
NALSA (Legal Services to the Workers in the Unorganised Sector) Scheme, 2015;
NALSA (Child Friendly Legal Services to Children and their Protection) Scheme, 2015;
NALSA (Legal Services to the Mentally Ill and Mentally Disabled Persons) Scheme, 2015;
NALSA (Effective Implementation of Poverty Alleviation) Scheme, 2015;
NALSA (Protection and Enforcement of Tribal Rights) Scheme, 2015;
NALSA (Legal Services to the Victims of Drug Abuse and Eradication of Drug Menace) Scheme, 2015;
NALSA (Legal Services to Senior Citizens) Scheme, 2016;
NALSA (Legal Services to Victims of Acid Attacks) Scheme, 2016;
NALSA’s Compensation Scheme for Women Victims/Survivors of Sexual Assault/other Crimes, 2018;
Early Access to Justice at Pre-Arrest, Arrest and Remand Stag
30.What is the income parameter for grant of legal aid to a person?
