Title: National Consumer Helpline
Publisher: Department of Consumer Affairs, Government of India
Jurisdiction: India
URL: https://consumerhelpline.gov.in/
Domain: Consumer Complaint
Downloaded on: 2026-06-24

1915
(8AM to 8PM)
Your Grievances, Our Redressal
We are here to solve your grievances
Register Grievance
Register
Track Your Grievance
Track Now
Upload Documents
Upload
Consumer Access Platforms
Connect With Us
Choose your preferred platform to reach National Consumer Helpline
WhatsApp Web
Instant chat support for consumer grievances
NCH Mobile App
Register complaints and track status easily
UMANG App
Access services via unified government platform
NCH Success Stories
When NCH spoke to the consumer, he confirmed that he had received the refund of ₹85000/-. Now the issue is resolved and he is satisfied with the same.
View Story #2809046
Would like to thank, you are doing such good work for people because nowadays many organisations or companies are doing wrong thing with us. As of now over all service was good. If youll give comments option on ticket as in progress status mode.
View Story #2977800
I got the refund of my money. Thanks to NCH. I request NCH to take severe action against the company, since I'm not the only person who got cheated, there are lot more people affected. It's a big harassment by the company to the consumers. Without NCH I would have never got my money back, so I thank you once again.
View Story #2155826
NCH Videos and Podcasts
NCH 2.0 – Empowering Consumers
17 Languages
Omni Channels
Convergence Partner
Call Back Facility
Multiple ways to lodge grievances
Through Online Portal
Through NCH App
Through UMANG App
Through WhatsApp
National Consumer Helpline,
Department of Consumer Affairs, GOI
Chat Now
Provide Feedback to National Consumer Helpline
Logins
Company Login
Regulators Login
Other
Track Grievance
Upload Docs
Leave a Feedback
To Register as a convergence Partner with NCH.
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
© 2016–2026 Copyright Department of Consumer Affairs
Total Visitors:
2,743,995
