Title: CPGRAMS Public Grievance Portal
Publisher: Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
Jurisdiction: India
URL: https://pgportal.gov.in/
Domain: Public Grievance
Downloaded on: 2026-06-24

ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ (Santhali)
Any Grievance sent by email will not be attended to / entertained. Please lodge your grievance on this portal.
ABOUT CPGRAMS
Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) is an online platform available to the citizens 24x7 to lodge their grievances to the public authorities on any subject related to service delivery. It is a single portal connected to all the Ministries/Departments of Government of India and States. Every Ministry and States have role-based access to this system. CPGRAMS is also accessible to the citizens through standalone mobile application downloadable through Google Play store and mobile application integrated with UMANG.
The status of the grievance filed in CPGRAMS can be tracked with the unique registration ID provided at the time of registration of the complainant. CPGRAMS also provides appeal facility to the citizens if they are not satisfied with the resolution by the Grievance Officer. After closure of grievance if the complainant is not satisfied with the resolution, he/she can provide feedback. If the rating is ‘Poor’ the option to file an appeal is enabled. The status of the Appeal can also be tracked by the petitioner with the grievance registration number.
Issues which are not taken up for redress :
RTI Matters
Court related / Subjudice matters
Religious matters
Grievances of Government employees concerning their service matters including disciplinary proceedings etc. unless the aggrieved employee has already exhausted the prescribed channels keeping in view the
DoPT OM No. 11013/08/2013-Estt.(A-III) dated 31.08.2015
Note :
If you have not got a satifactory redress of your grievance within a reasonable period of time,relating to
Ministries/Departments and Organisations
under the purview of Directorate of Public Grievances(DPG), Cabinet Secretariat, GOI, you may seek help of DPG in resolution. Please
for details.
Government is not charging fee from the public for filing grievances. All money being paid by the public for filing grievance is going only to M/s CSC only
WHAT'S NEW
July 2022
Strengthening of Machinery for Redressal of Public Grievance (CPGRAMS) (PDF - 1.05 MB)
August 2024
Comprehensive Guidelines for Handling the Public Grievances (PDF - 0.25 MB)
Register / Login
This site is designed, developed & hosted by National Informatics Centre, Ministry of Electronics & IT (MeitY), Government of India and Content owned by Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances.
Portal is Compatible with all major Browsers like Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox, Microsoft Edge, Safari etc.
Best Viewed in 1440 x 900 resolution
Disclaimer
Website Policies
Web Information Manager
Version 7.0.01092019.0.0, Copyright © 2026
Last Updated On: 19-06-2026
Total Visitors :
7510174
(since 19-01-2024)
